content/posts/beliefs.md, before:

+++
date = '2026-02-08T20:36:02+05:30'
draft = false
title = 'Things I believe to be true'
+++

Over the years, throughout my life, I've formulated beliefs that I hold to be true. These beliefs have shaped my perspective and guided my actions. Here are some of the things I believe to be true:

- **You can do it.** If you put enough effort into it, it can be done. In the words of Marcus Aurelius, “Do not think that what is hard for you to master is humanly impossible; and if it is humanly possible, consider it to be within your reach.”

- **Music** is the language of the universe, the earth and your soul. It can speak to ghosts in your head, it can transcend boundaries, and express emotion across the world and beyond. No matter what language, no matter what genre, no matter the instruments being used, every single note has something to say. Every single voice, every unique tone, every frequency is beautiful.

- **Every human has the inherent ability to do good**. It's just that for some people certain emotions such as greed, anger, and fear are louder than their good intentions. Evolution has put us in a tough spot, but even then, humans chose to be good.

- **Humanity is fucking amazing**. Curiosity, Tenacity, Collaboration, Empathy, and Love, Art, Peace, Complexity, Survival Instinct, Domination, Culture, Languages, Sadness and Happiness, Glee, Vicariousness and Science, Meta cognition, Philosophy and Intent, and god knows a lot more, everything, are uniquely human traits. I love humanity.

- **There is a God**. Or at least, some sort of sentient, supreme entity that is watching over us. It gives us strength, and patience. The complexity of this universe should not be taken for granted. It is a testament to the power of creation and the beauty of existence.

- **Push yourself**. In order to achieve something truly great, there's no option other than to push yourself beyond your wildest imagination. A tree that grows to heaven has its roots buried in hell.

- **Death is a saint**. People consider death to be something scary and something to be avoided, but it is a natural part of the human experience and should be respected and honored. I'd go far as to say that I would like people to celebrate when I leave this world.

- **Every human has a purpose**. You've born in this world because the universe has a plan for you. You are here to fulfill a specific role and contribute to the greater good. Embrace your purpose and make the most of your time on earth. 
  - What I believe to be **\*my\*** purpose in this universe are three things:
    - To attain as much knowledge I can (Especially about how the universe works, how the human body works, and how can computers be used to improve human healthcare).
    
    - To share that knowledge to as many people that I can
    
    - and, to holistically help who are less fortunate than I am (Food, Water, Education, Cleanliness, Healthcare, and Employment)

- **Life is fundamentally beautiful**. It is serene and amazing. Noticing the little things is an **art**, and once you master this art, you'll have a much more beautiful perspective on the world. You'll see pretty colors, and pleasant smells, and nice sounds. Not only that, but you'll start to notice the things that you never paid attention to, like the light of the moon, the sound of the wind, and the warmth of the sun, the smell of the rain, and the taste of the food and a million others.

- **Everything will be okay.** If it is not okay right now, it will be. It could take time, and it might hurt a little, but in the end, it will turn out to be fine. You'll be in a better place than you are right now, you'll be happier, you'll be better. And If you think that life is going downhill, it will turn around soon, and It will be better than it was earlier.


- **Talent and Hardwork are not mutually exclusive**. When you work hard enough at something, you become intrinsically talented at it. The more you practice, the better you get, and the more you get better, the more talented you become. It's a virtuous cycle that leads to success and fulfillment.

- **DO. IT. WELL.** In the battle of "Doing it well, but with high effort" and "Doing it with a little effort, but only sub-optimally", always chose to do it well. Always.

Commit message:

feat: Add 'How can I help?' page, link it from the beliefs post, and include it in the main navigation menu.

content/posts/beliefs.md, after:

+++
date = '2026-02-08T20:36:02+05:30'
draft = false
title = 'Things I believe to be true'
+++

Over the years, throughout my life, I've formulated beliefs that I hold to be true. These beliefs have shaped my perspective and guided my actions. Here are some of the things I believe to be true:

- **You can do it.** If you put enough effort into it, it can be done. In the words of Marcus Aurelius, “Do not think that what is hard for you to master is humanly impossible; and if it is humanly possible, consider it to be within your reach.”

- **Music** is the language of the universe, the earth and your soul. It can speak to ghosts in your head, it can transcend boundaries, and express emotion across the world and beyond. No matter what language, no matter what genre, no matter the instruments being used, every single note has something to say. Every single voice, every unique tone, every frequency is beautiful.

- **Every human has the inherent ability to do good**. It's just that for some people certain emotions such as greed, anger, and fear are louder than their good intentions. Evolution has put us in a tough spot, but even then, humans chose to be good.

- **Humanity is fucking amazing**. Curiosity, Tenacity, Collaboration, Empathy, and Love, Art, Peace, Complexity, Survival Instinct, Domination, Culture, Languages, Sadness and Happiness, Glee, Vicariousness and Science, Meta cognition, Philosophy and Intent, and god knows a lot more, everything, are uniquely human traits. I love humanity.

- **There is a God**. Or at least, some sort of sentient, supreme entity that is watching over us. It gives us strength, and patience. The complexity of this universe should not be taken for granted. It is a testament to the power of creation and the beauty of existence.

- **Push yourself**. In order to achieve something truly great, there's no option other than to push yourself beyond your wildest imagination. A tree that grows to heaven has its roots buried in hell.

- **Death is a saint**. People consider death to be something scary and something to be avoided, but it is a natural part of the human experience and should be respected and honored. I'd go far as to say that I would like people to celebrate when I leave this world.

- **Every human has a purpose**. You've born in this world because the universe has a plan for you. You are here to fulfill a specific role and contribute to the greater good. Embrace your purpose and make the most of your time on earth. 
  - What I believe to be **\*my\*** purpose in this universe are three things:
    - To attain as much knowledge I can (Especially about how the universe works, how the human body works, and how can computers be used to improve human healthcare).
    
    - To share that knowledge to as many people that I can
    
    - and, to holistically help who are less fortunate than I am (Food, Water, Education, Cleanliness, Healthcare, and Employment). See the [**How can I help?**](../how-can-i-help) page for more details.

- **Life is fundamentally beautiful**. It is serene and amazing. Noticing the little things is an **art**, and once you master this art, you'll have a much more beautiful perspective on the world. You'll see pretty colors, and pleasant smells, and nice sounds. Not only that, but you'll start to notice the things that you never paid attention to, like the light of the moon, the sound of the wind, and the warmth of the sun, the smell of the rain, and the taste of the food and a million others.

- **Everything will be okay.** If it is not okay right now, it will be. It could take time, and it might hurt a little, but in the end, it will turn out to be fine. You'll be in a better place than you are right now, you'll be happier, you'll be better. And If you think that life is going downhill, it will turn around soon, and It will be better than it was earlier.


- **Talent and Hardwork are not mutually exclusive**. When you work hard enough at something, you become intrinsically talented at it. The more you practice, the better you get, and the more you get better, the more talented you become. It's a virtuous cycle that leads to success and fulfillment.

- **DO. IT. WELL.** In the battle of "Doing it well, but with high effort" and "Doing it with a little effort, but only sub-optimally", always chose to do it well. Always.
